Add JOSE paper (#366)
carpentries-incubator/deep-learning-intro: paper.md

tags:
  - Python
  - deep learning
  - machine learning
  - Keras
  - neural networks
authors:
  - name: Sven A. van der Burg
    orcid: 0000-0003-1250-6968
    affiliation: 1 # (Multiple affiliations must be quoted, like "1, 2")
  - name: Anne Fouilloux
    orcid: 0000-0002-1784-2920
    affiliation: 2
  - name: Florian Huber
    orcid: 0000-0002-3535-9406
    affiliation: "1, 3"
  - name: Dafne van Kuppevelt
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Peter Steinbach
    orcid: 0000-0002-4974-230X
    affiliation: 4
  - name: Berend Weel
    orcid: 0000-0002-9693-9332
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Colin Sauze
    orcid: 0000-0001-5368-9217
    affiliation: 5
  - name: Samantha Wittke
    orcid: 0000-0002-9625-7235
    affiliation: "6,7"
  - name: Djura Smits
    orcid: 0000-0003-4096-0260
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Cunliang Geng
    orcid: 0000-0002-1409-8358
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Pranav Chandramouli
    orcid: 0000-0002-7896-2969
    affiliation: 1

affiliations:
 - name: Netherlands eScience Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
   index: 1
 - name: Simula Research Laboratory, Oslo, Norway
   index: 2
 - name: Düsseldorf University of Applied Sciences, Düsseldorf, Germany
   index: 3

>  - name: Helmholtz-Zentrum, Dresden-Rossendorf, Germany

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - name: Helmholtz-Zentrum Dresden-Rossendorf, Dresden, Germany
```

   index: 4
 - name: National Oceanography Centre, Liverpool, Great-Britain
   index: 5
 - name: CSC - IT center for Science, Espoo, Finland
   index: 6
 - name: Aalto University, Espoo, Finland
   index: 7
date: 8 August 2023
bibliography: paper.bib

---

# Summary
This article describes a hands-on introduction to the first steps in deep learning, 
intended for researchers who are familiar with (non-deep) machine learning.

> The use of deep learning has seen a sharp increase of popularity and applicability over the last decade. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The use of deep learning has seen a sharp increase in popularity and applicability over the last decade. 
```

While deep learning can be a useful tool for researchers from a wide range of domains, 
taking the first steps in the world of deep learning can be somewhat intimidating. 

> This introduction aims to cover the basics of deep learning in a practical and hands-on manner, 
> so that upon completion, students will be able to train their first neural network and understand 
> what next steps to take to improve the model.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This introduction aims to cover the fundamentals of deep learning in a practical and hands-on manner. By the end of the course, students will be able to train their first neural network and understand the subsequent steps needed to improve the model.
```

> The lesson starts with explaining the basic concepts of neural networks, 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The lesson starts by explaining the basic concepts of neural networks, 
```

> and then go through the different steps of a deep learning workflow. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
and then guides learners through the different steps of a deep learning workflow. 
```

Learners will learn how to prepare data for deep learning, 
how to implement a basic deep learning model in Python with Keras, 

> how to monitor and troubleshoot the training process and how to implement different layer types such as convolutional layers.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
how to monitor and troubleshoot the training process and how to implement different layer types, such as convolutional layers.
```

> Learners will learn how to prepare data for deep learning, 
> how to implement a basic deep learning model in Python with Keras, 
> how to monitor and troubleshoot the training process and how to implement different layer types such as convolutional layers.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
After following the lesson, learners will be able to prepare data for deep learning, 
implement a basic deep learning model in Python with Keras, 
monitor and troubleshoot the training process 
and implement different layer types such as convolutional layers.
```

Author: Done with: 20867ebd853df06097fcc3e1197f642a59dbd7e4

# Statement of Need

> There are many great free online course materials on deep learning, 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
There are many free online course materials on deep learning, 
```

> for example: fast.ai's Practical Deep Learning for Coders, MORE ONLINE COURSES

Reviewer 5: No personal experience with free DL courses, but maybe some of these could be added: https://medium.com/javarevisited/10-free-deep-learning-courses-for-beginners-37b5de61f8dc ?

Reviewer 5: Could also mention that many computing centers have DL courses available? [Example from CSC](https://ssl.eventilla.com/event/8aPek), which used to be free when it was funded by PRACE, which also had DL courses from other centers if I remember correctly.

Reviewer 6: A classic is also the online courses with Andrew Ng (on Coursera) --> https://www.coursera.org/specializations/deep-learning

Reviewer 2: Andrew Ng's courses are excellent (I have done those.) but they are not free.

Reviewer 6: You are right, is it not free (at least not fully).
Coursera started to hide this a bit more I think, but those courses are free to "audit", so all videos and documents are freely accessible, but not the quizzes and code exercises.

Author: Great suggestions! I added them in f982c7cdb55d2de72229d9cdc4841aafb1334206 , will convert to references later.

Nonetheless, these resources are often not available open-source and can thus not be easily adapted to the students' needs. 

> Also, the amount and diversity of the existing online courses is overwhelming, but they are generally not targeted towards academic researchers.

Reviewer 4: I'm not sure it helps our case to call the existing range of courses "overwhelming": my immediate thought was "so we decided to make it even worse by adding one more!" 😂

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Also, although a diverse range of online courses already exists, few are targeted towards academic researchers.
```

Author: applied in 26af0be1f707175308fa8ca3a604b09972c1fe53

What works well for researchers is to both make them familiar with the key concepts, and also let them 

> practice with how to implement it. Eventually resulting in a feeling of 'I can do this myself'. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
practice with how to implement it. Eventually resulting in an increase in confidence and  the conviction that 'I can do this myself'. 
```

Reviewer 4: I am not convinced that this statement is true only of researchers. It seems like the same description could apply to anyone who wants to learn enough DL to be able to use it in their work.

> The key to getting there is live coding: Before the course learners have to setup a working environment on their own computer.

Reviewer 3: I am not sure "B" (capital letter) is required here.

> The key to getting there is live coding: Before the course learners have to setup a working environment on their own computer.

Reviewer 4: This paragraph gets to the crux of it: this lesson is different from most free online courses because it has been developed for Instructors to use in a workshop. It is also intended to be usable for self-directed learning, but I think we should emphasise workshop use as the primary purpose.

> During the course learners type in the commands that are explained by the instructor on their own computer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
During the course, learners type in the commands that are explained by the instructor on their own computer.
```

Reviewer 4: Probably a good idea to refer specifically to Carpentry-style teaching here. See [this JOSE paper from early 2023](https://jose.theoj.org/papers/10.21105/jose.00192) for an example of how others have cited [Greg's 2006 paper about Software Carpentry](https://doi.org/10.1109/mcse.2006.122)

Author: Good point @tobyhodges! I included it with 1c9409f3bca22758ff91fe5e14eddb6c74e087de

This ensures that learners master the programmatic implementation of deep learning at the end of the course. 

Researchers can often only free a limited amount of time (maximum 5 consecutive days), since they are so involved in their daily work.

> To accomplish this, we created a lesson that can be taught in 2 consecutive days or 4 mornings.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
To accomplish this, we created a lesson that can be taught in 2 consecutive days or 4 half days.
```
Does not necessarily have to be mornings?

> From the feedback we gathered from students enrolled in our workshops and instructors not involved in our project we see that indeed there is a 
> need for a low-threshold lesson that lets researchers take the first steps in the field of deep learning.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Demand for our workshops and feedback gathered from students demonstrated the
need for a low-threshold lesson that lets researchers take the first steps in the field of deep learning.
This impression was validated by other instructors who taught the lesson independently to their own audiences and provided us with feedback on their experience.
```

# Instructional design

> This lesson material was designed using the concepts from the Carpentries Curriculum Development Handbook (REFERENCE https://cdh.carpentries.org/).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This lesson material was designed using the concepts from The Carpentries Curriculum Development Handbook (REFERENCE https://cdh.carpentries.org/).
```

> Most importantly, we used 'backward design': We started with identifying learning objectives: the core skills and concepts that learners need to acquire as a result of the lesson.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Most importantly, we used 'backward design': we started with identifying learning objectives, the core skills and concepts that learners should acquire as a result of the lesson.
```

> Then, these learning objectives were used to create exercises that test whether the objectives are met.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Next, exercises were designed to assess whether these objectives are met.
```

> Eventually, the content is written in such a way that it matches what learners need to learn to successfully apply these skills.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Eventually, the content is written to teach the skills and concepts learners need to successfully complete the exercises and, it follows, meet the learning objectives.
```

> Furthermore, the lesson is built around live coding. 
> The lesson is built up of small blocks. In each block first the instructor demonstrates how to do something,
> and students follow along on their own computer. Then, the students work independently on exercises individually
> or in groups to test their skills.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Live coding is central to this approach: 
the lesson is built up of small blocks. In each block first the instructor demonstrates how to do something,
and students follow along on their own computer. Then, the students work independently on exercises individually
or in groups to test their skills.
```

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This approach integrates opportunities for guided practice throughout the lesson,
promoting learning by 
helping learners build up a functioning mental model of the domain and 
transfer new knowledge from working memory to long-term memory.

```

> The lesson material is built in the new Carpentries lesson template (REFERENCE). 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The lesson material is built in the new Carpentries lesson template (REFERENCE https://carpentries.github.io/workbench/). 
```

This makes the lesson material both suited as a self-study resource, a syllabus to share with students after the workshop,
as well as lesson material for the instructor. With the 'instructor view' we even include instructor notes 

> at the level of the lesson content.

Reviewer 3: Would it make sense to explain that the lesson is not shown by the instructor when teaching the lesson and only shared after? Or do we assume that everyone knows about The Carpentries approach to teaching?

Reviewer 4: +1 to Ann's question: we seem to be half-and-half on this at the moment, explaining some aspects of teaching-by-live-demo but not all of it.

Reviewer 4: I would also like to mention the accessibility features of the lesson infrastructure here. Happy to draft a sentence if you like?

> The lesson is split up in a general introduction, and 3 episodes that cover 3 distinct increasingly more complex deep learning problems.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The lesson is split into a general introduction, and 3 episodes that cover 3 distinct increasingly more complex deep learning problems.
```
Not sure about this one.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The lesson is split into a general introduction, and 3 episodes that cover 3 distinct increasingly more complex deep learning concepts.
```

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The lesson is split up in a general introduction, and 3 episodes that cover 3 distinct and increasingly complex deep learning problems.
```

Reviewer 4: I don't know if JOSE has a style guide, but "3" may be preferably written as "three".

> Each of the deep learning problems is approached using the same 10-step deep learning workflow.

Reviewer 4: List the ten steps here? Or is that spoilers? 😆

Author: Hmmm, the instructions for submitting to JOSE state clearly that the paper should not go into details on the content. The lesson itself is the resource for that. But we should link to the 10-step deep learning workflow: https://carpentries-incubator.github.io/deep-learning-intro/1-introduction.html#deep-learning-workflow See ddf9378b865756f0ff7d914e0b37c3ea5304282f

> By going through the deep learning cycle 3 times on different problems we hope that after the lesson learners will
> feel confident in applying this deep learning workflow to their own work.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
By going through the deep learning cycle three times with different problems, learners become increasingly confident in applying this deep learning workflow to their own projects.
```

# Feedback

> This course was taught 7 times over the course of 3 years, both online and in person, at the Netherlands eScience Center. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This course was taught 7 times over the course of 3 years, both online and in-person, at the Netherlands eScience Center. 
```

Author: Check, done in: d6f98698283d311b81d5fdd5d76bdcf25b5fbe77

> **@Peter @Colin how often did you teach this at which institutes?**

Reviewer 4: @psteinb @colinsauze (when back from vacation)

Reviewer: We taught the course at least 2 times at Helmholtz since 2021.

Author: @psteinb I included the teaching at Helmholtz. 

Ah @colinsauze that was this one: https://bio-it.embl.de/events/introduction-to-deep-learning/ I didn't know you were involved. We currently list it as an independent beta-pilot (since we got feedback from Renato Alves). Is that still correct? Or should we put it under one of our own teachings?

Apart from the core group of contributors, the workshop was also taught at 3 independent institutes, namely:

> University of Wisconson-Madison, University of Auckland, and EMBL Heidelberg.

Reviewer 3: I would also add the country and link to these institutions.

Reviewer: As mentioned, I taught this course each year since 2021, i.e. 2 times (excluding 2023).There are teaching opportunities coming along soon. The course was taught virtually in all cases, where participants originated from of [KIT](https://kit.edu), [FZJ](https://fz-juelich.de), [DESY](https://desy.de), [HZDR](https://hzdr.de), [HZB](https://helmholtz-berlin.de), [GSI](https://gsi.de).

Author: Thanks @annefou and @psteinb. I addressed your comments in 0ccb76631335a85de41b5eeffbbe58d60445cefe

> In general, adoption of the lesson material by the instructors not involved in the project went well.

Reviewer 4: Reiterate here that feedback from instructors was used to iterate on/polish the lesson further? Or do we not need to since it was mentioned once already?

Reviewer: Yes, and at least in my case, we always tried to add fixes immediately when we discovered deficiencies.

Author: Yes, good to add. I added 85e47dbfd1a4369dfb9729bc0147f58f25180b4d

## Student responses

> The feedback we gathered from students is in general very positive, further confirming our statement of need.
> We use the student's feedback to continuously improve the lesson. 
> Some responses from students to the question 'What was your favourite or most useful part of the workshop. Why?' further support the need for this workshop:
> 
> _I enjoyed the live coding and playing with the models to see how it would effect the results. 
> It felt hands on and made it easy for me to understand the concepts._
> 
> _Well-defined steps to be followed in training a model is very useful. Examples we worked on are quite nice._
> 
> _The doing part, that really helps to get the theory into practice._

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The feedback we gathered from students is in general very positive, 
with some responses from students to the question 'What was your favourite or most useful part of the workshop. Why?' further confirming our statement of need:

> _I enjoyed the live coding and playing with the models to see how it would effect the results. 
> It felt hands on and made it easy for me to understand the concepts._

> _Well-defined steps to be followed in training a model is very useful. Examples we worked on are quite nice._

> _The doing part, that really helps to get the theory into practice._

We use the student's feedback to continuously improve the lesson. 
```

Reorganising slightly.

|     Monitoring and Troubleshooting the learning process (weather dataset) | 0 (0%)           | 0 (0%)      | 4 (11%)     | 18 (47%)         | 16 (42%)         | 0 (0%)     | 38           | 4,3                     |
|     Advanced layer types (CIFAR-10 dataset)                               | 0 (0%)           | 2 (5%)      | 5 (13%)     | 7 (18%)          | 16 (42%)         | 8 (21%)    | 38           | 4,2                     |
Table 2: Quality of the different episodes of the workshop as rated by students from 2 workshops taught at the Netherlands eScience Center. 
The results from these 2 workshops are a good representation of the general feedback we get when teaching this workshop.

# Citations

Citations to entries in paper.bib should be in
[rMarkdown](http://rmarkdown.rstudio.com/authoring_bibliographies_and_citations.html)
format.

For a quick reference, the following citation commands can be used:
- `@author:2001`  ->  "Author et al. (2001)"
- `[@author:2001]` -> "(Author et al., 2001)"
- `[@author1:2001; @author2:2001]` -> "(Author1 et al., 2001; Author2 et al., 2002)"

# Figures

> Figures can be included like this: ![Example figure.](figure.png)

Reviewer 4: These need to be removed, right?

Author: Correct. Done in 772ecefb22f09fcb78624e567fd76055b8e422f0

> 

Reviewer 4: I propose a concluding section where we could discuss how and where the lesson might fit in a learning pathway, e.g. what could learners move onto next after following this lesson? What could instructors teach them beforehand, to ensure they are ready to follow this lesson?

Author: Good point. It ends quite abruptly currently. Implemented with c65c67188291083f6581fb479d1a6f67a07b1e6d

# Acknowledgements
We would like to thank all instructors and helpers that taught the course,
the community of people that left contributions to the project, no matter how big or small, 
and the people around the world that piloted this workshop at their institutes.
We thank the Carpentries for providing such a great framework for developing this lesson material.

> We thank all students enrolled in the workshops that were taught using this lesson material for providing us with feedback.

Reviewer 4: Is it possible to name the Instructors who taught workshops and gave feedback? I am not sure of the conventions for Acknowledgements in JOSE, but I think it would be nice to name-check people if we know their names.

Author: Good point, done in d90cd93e1213e027f985b3b40e5700c2cf3d379b

Author: @qualiaMachine @NidhiGowdra @unode can you check if we wrote your names and affiliations correctly in https://github.com/carpentries-incubator/deep-learning-intro/commit/d90cd93e1213e027f985b3b40e5700c2cf3d379b?

---
title: 'Introduction to deep learning: Carpentries-style hands-on lesson material for introducing researchers to deep learning'
tags:
  - Python
  - deep learning
  - machine learning
  - Keras
  - neural networks
authors:
  - name: Sven A. van der Burg
    orcid: 0000-0003-1250-6968
    affiliation: 1 # (Multiple affiliations must be quoted, like "1, 2")
  - name: Anne Fouilloux
    orcid: 0000-0002-1784-2920
    affiliation: 2
  - name: Florian Huber
    orcid: 0000-0002-3535-9406
    affiliation: "1, 3"
  - name: Dafne van Kuppevelt
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Peter Steinbach
    orcid: 0000-0002-4974-230X
    affiliation: 4
  - name: Berend Weel
    orcid: 0000-0002-9693-9332
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Colin Sauze
    orcid: 0000-0001-5368-9217
    affiliation: 5
  - name: Samantha Wittke
    orcid: 0000-0002-9625-7235
    affiliation: "6,7"
  - name: Djura Smits
    orcid: 0000-0003-4096-0260
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Cunliang Geng
    orcid: 0000-0002-1409-8358
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Pranav Chandramouli
    orcid: 0000-0002-7896-2969
    affiliation: 1

> 
> affiliations:
>  - name: Netherlands eScience Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
>    index: 1
>  - name: Simula Research Laboratory, Oslo, Norway
>    index: 2
>  - name: Düsseldorf University of Applied Sciences, Düsseldorf, Germany
>    index: 3
>  - name: Helmholtz-Zentrum Dresden-Rossendorf, Dresden, Germany
>    index: 4
>  - name: National Oceanography Centre, Liverpool, Great-Britain
>    index: 5
>  - name: CSC - IT center for Science, Espoo, Finland
>    index: 6
>  - name: Aalto University, Espoo, Finland
>    index: 7

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  - name: Toby Hodges
    orcid: 0000-0003-1766-456X
    affiliation: 8

affiliations:
 - name: Netherlands eScience Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
   index: 1
 - name: Simula Research Laboratory, Oslo, Norway
   index: 2
 - name: Düsseldorf University of Applied Sciences, Düsseldorf, Germany
   index: 3
 - name: Helmholtz-Zentrum Dresden-Rossendorf, Dresden, Germany
   index: 4
 - name: National Oceanography Centre, Liverpool, Great-Britain
   index: 5
 - name: CSC - IT center for Science, Espoo, Finland
   index: 6
 - name: Aalto University, Espoo, Finland
   index: 7
 - name: The Carpentries, USA
   index: 8 
```

Reviewer 4: Adding myself so you don't have to dig up my orcid. Not sure if we have a preferred system for the order of the author list but you are welcome to move me elsewhere however you like.

Author: Ah, already added you in the meantime, but I had located the carpentries in Heidelberg instead of the USA. Fixed that with 1fe236a17f0277e863f403fac94c195eaf96bba3

Apart from the core group of contributors, the workshop was also taught at 3 independent institutes, namely:
University of Wisconson-Madison (US, https://www.wisc.edu/), University of Auckland (New Zealand, https://www.auckland.ac.nz/), 
and EMBL Heidelberg (Germany, https://www.embl.org/sites/heidelberg/).
In general, adoption of the lesson material by the instructors not involved in the project went well.
The feedback gathered from our own and others' teachings was used to polish the lesson further.

## Student responses
The feedback we gathered from students is in general very positive, 
with some responses from students to the question 'What was your favourite or most useful part of the workshop. Why?' further confirming our statement of need:

> _I enjoyed the live coding and playing with the models to see how it would effect the results. 
> It felt hands on and made it easy for me to understand the concepts._

> _Well-defined steps to be followed in training a model is very useful. Examples we worked on are quite nice._

> _The doing part, that really helps to get the theory into practice._

> Below are two tables summarizing results from our post-workshop survey. We use the student's feedback to continuously improve the lesson. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Below are two tables summarizing results from our post-workshop survey. We use the students' feedback to continuously improve the lesson. 
```

very minor typo fix

---
title: 'Introduction to deep learning: Carpentries-style hands-on lesson material for introducing researchers to deep learning'
tags:
  - Python
  - deep learning
  - machine learning
  - Keras
  - neural networks
authors:
  - name: Sven A. van der Burg
    orcid: 0000-0003-1250-6968
    affiliation: 1 # (Multiple affiliations must be quoted, like "1, 2")
  - name: Anne Fouilloux
    orcid: 0000-0002-1784-2920
    affiliation: 2
  - name: Florian Huber
    orcid: 0000-0002-3535-9406
    affiliation: "1, 3"
  - name: Dafne van Kuppevelt

>     affiliation: 1

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
    orcidid: 0000-0002-2662-1994
    affiliation: 1
```

Author: Thanks for adding! FYI it should be orcid and not orcidid (then the ID is double). But it is confusing :)

|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------|-----------------|------------------|--------------|-----------------------|--------------|-------------------------|
| I can immediately apply what I learned at this workshop.                                   | 0                             | 5               | 6                | 19           | 8                     | 38           | 3,8                     |
| The setup and installation instructions for the lesson were complete and easy to follow.   | 0                             | 0               | 4                | 13           | 21                    | 38           | 4,4                     |
| Examples and tasks in the lesson were relevant and authentic                               | 0                             | 0               | 5                | 19           | 14                    | 38           | 4,2                     |

> Table 1: Agreement on statements by students from 2 workshops taught at the Netherlands eScience Center. 

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion

Table 1: Agreement on statements by students from 2 workshops taught at the Netherlands eScience Center. 
```
A space line is needed to make table rendered properly

|---------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------|-------------|-------------|------------------|------------------|------------|--------------|-------------------------|
|     Introduction into Deep Learning                                       | 0 (0%)           | 2 (5%)      | 10 (27%)    | 8 (22%)          | 17 (46%)         | 0 (0%)     | 37           | 4,1                     |
|     Classification by a Neural Network using Keras (penguins dataset)     | 0 (0%)           | 1 (3%)      | 5 (13%)     | 16 (42%)         | 16 (42%)         | 0 (0%)     | 38           | 4,2                     |
|     Monitoring and Troubleshooting the learning process (weather dataset) | 0 (0%)           | 0 (0%)      | 4 (11%)     | 18 (47%)         | 16 (42%)         | 0 (0%)     | 38           | 4,3                     |
|     Advanced layer types (CIFAR-10 dataset)                               | 0 (0%)           | 2 (5%)      | 5 (13%)     | 7 (18%)          | 16 (42%)         | 8 (21%)    | 38           | 4,2                     |

> Table 2: Quality of the different episodes of the workshop as rated by students from 2 workshops taught at the Netherlands eScience Center. 

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion

Table 2: Quality of the different episodes of the workshop as rated by students from 2 workshops taught at the Netherlands eScience Center. 
```
